AHOY! Sail the high seas from the deck of your flagship and cross the "T" with other Napoleonic captains.  Prove yourself to be the second coming of Nelson.  Captains may enter any and all available actions Friday with single ship actions running hourly from 9am-9pm and multiple ship actions at 9am., 11am., 1pm., 3pm. and 7pm.  New this year is a Tuesday Night Early Bird edition running from 6-10pm.  The tournament will close with a fleet action using painted miniatures on Saturday at 11.  The captains with the two greatest victory point totals when the smoke clears will playoff to decide the ultimate successor to Nelson.

FORMAT: The format continues the one started last year with a few changes.  Players may enter and leave to suit their needs.  Casual players only wanting to play a single game may do so.  Players may play as many or few actions as time allows.  There will be a play-off between the two players having the highest points total after the Fleet Action on Saturday with the winner of that match being the overall tournament champion.  Players may accumulate points from any number of matches (minimum of 3) with a maximum of ten hours of ship actions (not elapsed time) plus any points from the Fleet Action being applied towards their victory total.  Also, players may play a single match during off-hours (See Off-Hours Play).  Points will awarded based as follows:

Single Ship Actions:
Single Ship Actions will run 60 minutes after which a draw is declared.  Players will select from the available choices or otherwise use the default selection.  There will be a mix of frigate and SOL actions.  New Players may opt to play under the Basic Rules.  Where possible new players will be paired with each other.  All players arriving for single ship actions will be guaranteed an opponent (the GM, will as necessary, play additional games beyond  the game declared as his point game. He will receive no additional points.).

Points for Single Ship Actions (Power Rating of 1.0) are:
Wins: 	10pts.		Draw:	5pts.		Loss:	1pt.

Multiple Ship Actions:
There are two types of Multiple Ship Actions:
2 Hour Multiple Ship Actions:
Matches are depending on player availability.  These actions will run 2 hours after which a draw is declared. Players have 63 points, no class one ships; both players may select from the same Nationality from the provided Ship Specifications Charts.

Points for 2 Hour Actions (Power Rating of 2.5) are:
Wins: 	20pts.		Draw:	10pts.		Loss:	2pt.

4 Hour Multiple Ship Actions:
The matches are, again, depending on player availability.  These actions will run 4 hours after which a draw is declared.  Players will have 100 points, any class ships; both players may select from the same Nationality from the provided Ship Specifications Charts. 

Points for 4 Hour Actions (Power Rating of 5.5) are:
Wins: 	40pts.			Draw:	20pts.		Loss:	4pt.


Saturday’s Fleet Action will award points (to each fleet, thus Swedes will have a 1st place winner as will the Russians) using the following:
1st:	16pts.		2nd:	14pts.		3rd:	12pts.		4th:	10pts.
All others participating will receive 5 points.

OFF-HOURS PLAY: New this year to allow players a little more flexibility in getting matches in around their other tournaments or against opponents whom might otherwise be occupied; Players may play one match off-hours when the tournament is not actually in session.  Both of the players must be registered in the tournament and the match must be approved by the GM or the assistants prior to playing the match.  

RULES SELECTION:   The new “Tournament Rules” version 1.2b will be used.  All players  registering for the tournament will receive a copy.  The rules are roughly the same as the 2nd edition rules of WSM, with changes printed in italics, and a “What’s New?” synopsis.  All games use the Tournament Rules, Advanced Game unless otherwise agreed to by both players in writing prior to the game (exception: Beginner single ship matches using may use Basic Rules).  Special Note: the old “Optional Rake Determination” is now standard.  

There is no anchoring in any of the rounds.

Players may consider any of the Optional Rules; both players must agree in writing prior to the beginning of the match.

There will be match and player sheets.  The match sheets are to be completed by the players in a match and handed in along with the ship log sheets of the completed match at its conclusion by the winner.  Only completed match sheets turned in by 4pm. Saturday will be used in determining the highest point totals.  The player sheets will be used by the GM to record overall records for each player.  It will list a player’s matches, opponent and points received and whether the match is to be used in determining overall victory points when matches are in excess of ten hours.

Tiebreakers in the event more than two players are tied at the end of the Fleet Action are as follows:
1.  Head to head record
2.  Record against common opponents 
3.  Strength of Schedule - Overall record of all opponents 
4.  Power rating of scenarios played 
5.  Total points for all matches played  

Action Instructions:
STARTING LOCATIONS:
Player 1, bow hex leading vessel, I26, Direction 2
 	Player 2, bow hex leading vessel, QQ26, Direction 6

All other ships are follow the leading vessel in a line astern.

WIND:
Wind Direction: 1, 
Force 3 - Normal Breeze
Wind Change Number: 11

VICTORY CONDITIONS:
As per Section 14.0.  If no points awarded, game is a draw.  
WORLD BOARDGAMING CHAMIONSHIPS
JUNE 26th-July 1st, 2001

WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN TOURNAMENT
TUESDAY, June 26th/ FRIDAY, June 29th /SATURDAY, JUNE 30th






 EMBED Word.Picture.8  



